README.md, before:

# NEAM — National Economic Activity Monitor

## Sovereign Economic Intelligence & Intervention Infrastructure

---

### Executive Summary

NEAM is not a dashboard. It is a national economic sensing, intelligence, and intervention infrastructure that enables governments to see, understand, and act on the economy in real time. Designed for sovereignty, security, and long-term maintainability, NEAM provides a comprehensive platform for economic monitoring, anomaly detection, policy execution, and evidence-based governance.

This platform represents a strategic national asset, built to support early warning systems, crisis response capabilities, and evidence-grade documentation for parliamentary and judicial oversight. NEAM operates across three foundational layers: Sensing (data ingestion), Intelligence (analysis and prediction), and Intervention (policy execution).

---

### Core Architecture

NEAM operates through three integrated layers that transform raw economic data into actionable intelligence and measurable policy outcomes. The Sensing Layer Collects national economic signals from diverse sources including payment processors, energy grids, transportation networks, and industrial output monitors. This multi-source ingestion framework normalizes heterogeneous data formats into standardized economic indicators while preserving privacy and complying with data sovereignty requirements.

The Intelligence Layer Converts signals into insights through real-time anomaly detection, inflation forecasting, regional heat-map generation, and cross-sector correlation analysis. Advanced statistical models and machine learning algorithms identify unusual patterns, predict economic shifts, and flag potential disruptions before they escalate into systemic risks.

The Intervention Layer Enables policy and operational action through rule-based enforcement, emergency controls, scenario simulation, and workflow automation. This layer transforms analytical insights into concrete interventions, from targeted subsidies during regional crises to economy-wide emergency protocols during national emergencies.

---

### Key Capabilities

The platform delivers eight integrated capabilities that collectively form a complete economic command infrastructure. Economic Sensing provides multi-source, real-time data ingestion with offline and batch processing support, aggregating signals from payment velocity, energy telemetry, transport throughput, and industrial production indicators. The system Normalizes heterogeneous data formats using Apache Kafka for streaming and Apache Spark for batch processing, with schema definitions in Avro and Protobuf.

Economic Intelligence offers real-time anomaly detection with configurable thresholds, inflation and slowdown early warning systems, regional heat-map intelligence for geographic targeting, and cross-sector correlation analysis to identify systemic risks. The Intelligence Engine operates on Go microservices for real-time processing, with Python analytics (NumPy, SciPy) for statistical modeling and PyTorch for offline machine learning training. Feature storage leverages PostgreSQL for metadata and ClickHouse for high-performance OLAP queries.

Policy and Intervention provides rule-based policy enforcement with YAML and JSON configuration, emergency intervention workflows with multi-level approvals, scenario simulation for what-if analysis before policy rollout, and state and sector-specific controls for targeted implementation. The workflow engine utilizes Temporal or Cadence for reliable execution, with Redis for state management.

Government Decision Dashboards deliver role-based views tailored to PMO, Finance Ministry, State Governments, and District Administrators. Real-time economic heatmaps, drill-down analytics, and evidence-ready exports support parliamentary reporting and court documentation. The frontend stack uses React 18 with TypeScript, Recharts and D3 for visualization, Redux Toolkit for state management, and OAuth2 with RBAC for access control.

Audit, Security, and Sovereignty ensure immutable audit trails with WORM storage, evidence-grade data retention, zero-trust access control, and on-prem or air-gapped deployment capability. Cryptographic sealing using SHA-256 and Merkle Trees enables forensic investigations and court-grade verification. The security stack incorporates Keycloak or custom IAM, Hardware Security Modules (HSM), and OpenSearch for SIEM.

Integration and Interoperability provides inter-ministry integrations, central bank compatibility, state and district adapters, and legacy system support. API management through Kong or NGINX, secure messaging via Kafka with mTLS, and REST and gRPC protocols for data exchange complete the integration framework.

---

### Technology Stack

The platform employs a carefully selected technology stack optimized for performance, security, and long-term maintainability. The backend infrastructure uses Go 1.21 for high-performance microservices, leveraging the Gin or Fiber frameworks for API development. Streaming infrastructure relies on Apache Kafka for real-time data pipelines, with Kafka Streams for stream processing.

The analytics stack incorporates Python with NumPy and SciPy for numerical computing, PyTorch for machine learning model training, PostgreSQL for relational data management, ClickHouse for high-performance OLAP analytics, and Redis for caching and pub/sub messaging.

The frontend stack utilizes React 18 with TypeScript for type-safe UI development, Redux Toolkit for predictable state management, Recharts and D3 for data visualization, and OAuth2 with RBAC for secure authentication and authorization.

Infrastructure components include Docker for containerization, Kubernetes for orchestration, Helm for package management, Terraform for infrastructure as code, and ArgoCD for GitOps-based continuous deployment.

---

### Data Storage Architecture

The platform implements a polyglot persistence strategy optimized for different data access patterns. Transactional data including user profiles, policy definitions, and audit metadata resides in PostgreSQL with robust ACID guarantees. Time-series data for economic indicators, sensor readings, and event streams uses TimescaleDB for automatic partitioning and efficient time-range queries.

Analytical workloads leverage ClickHouse for high-volume aggregations, columnar storage for compression efficiency, and distributed query execution for horizontal scalability. Hot data requiring sub-millisecond access times utilizes Redis with cluster support for high availability. Long-term archives and compliance retention utilize cold object storage with immutability guarantees for legal and regulatory requirements.

---

### Deployment Models

NEAM supports multiple deployment configurations to meet varying governmental requirements and infrastructure capabilities. On-premises data center deployment provides maximum sovereignty with complete air-gapped operation capability, suitable for classified or sensitive economic data environments. State private cloud deployment enables federation across state boundaries while maintaining data locality and regulatory compliance.

Hybrid central-state deployments balance centralized intelligence with distributed execution, enabling national oversight while respecting state-level autonomy. All deployment configurations support disaster recovery with geographically distributed backup and rapid restore capabilities.

The infrastructure-as-code approach using Terraform ensures reproducible deployments across environments, while Kubernetes provides consistent orchestration regardless of the underlying infrastructure. Helm charts package complex applications into deployable units with configurable overrides for environment-specific requirements.

---

### Security and Compliance

Security permeates every layer of the NEAM platform, reflecting its designation as sovereign infrastructure. Zero-trust architecture assumes no implicit trust, requiring authentication and authorization for every request regardless of network location. Network policies restrict communication between services to required pathways only.

Data sovereignty controls ensure that sensitive economic data remains within national boundaries, with configurable policies for data residency, cross-border transfer restrictions, and jurisdiction-specific retention requirements. Privacy-preserving aggregation techniques enable insight generation without exposing individual transactions or personal information.

The immutable audit system logs every access and decision with cryptographic sealing, supporting forensic investigation and court-grade evidence requirements. Hardware Security Modules (HSM) protect cryptographic keys, ensuring that even system administrators cannot access sensitive encryption materials.

Compliance mapping covers major regulatory frameworks including data protection legislation, financial services regulations, and government IT security standards. Automated compliance checks verify configuration against policy requirements, with remediation guidance for identified gaps.

---

### Getting Started

Development environment setup requires Docker and Docker Compose for local testing. The platform includes a comprehensive docker-compose configuration for spinning up all dependencies including Kafka, PostgreSQL, ClickHouse, Redis, and all microservices.

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/national-economic-monitor/neam-platform.git
cd neam-platform

# Start development environment
docker-compose up -d

# Verify services are running
./scripts/ops/health-check.sh
```

Production deployment requires Kubernetes infrastructure with Terraform for provisioning. Detailed deployment guides are available in the deployments directory, with environment-specific configurations for on-premises, cloud, and hybrid scenarios.

---

### Module Overview

The platform comprises nine primary modules, each responsible for specific capabilities within the economic monitoring framework.

**Sensing Layer** handles data ingestion from payments, energy, transport, and industry sources. Adapters normalize diverse data formats, validators ensure data quality, and rate limiters protect downstream systems from overwhelming traffic.

**Intelligence Engine** provides anomaly detection, inflation prediction, black economy monitoring, macro-economic modeling, and cross-sector correlation analysis. The feature store manages ML feature lifecycle with versioning and reproducibility.

**Intervention and Policy Engine** executes policy rules, manages emergency controls, simulates scenarios before deployment, and coordinates workflows across state and central government boundaries.

**Reporting and Evidence System** generates real-time dashboards, statutory reports for parliamentary oversight, forensic evidence with tamper-proof verification, and archival storage for long-term retention.

**Security, Audit, and Sovereignty** manages identity and access control, immutable logging, encryption and key management, zero-trust enforcement, and regulatory compliance.

**Frontend** delivers government interfaces including national dashboards, state-level views, crisis consoles, and administrative tools for policy management and audit review.

**Shared Platform Libraries** provide common utilities for configuration, logging, database access, caching, messaging, validation, and error handling across all modules.

**Deployment and Infrastructure** encompasses Kubernetes configurations, Helm charts, Terraform modules, networking designs, and disaster recovery procedures.

**Testing Framework** includes unit tests, integration tests, load testing, chaos engineering, security testing, and compliance verification.

---

### Documentation Structure

The documentation hierarchy reflects the platform architecture with dedicated sections for each module and cross-cutting concerns. The docs directory contains policy documents, legal frameworks, and governmental specifications. Architecture documentation includes system diagrams, threat models, and design decisions. Compliance documentation maps regulatory requirements to implementation controls.

---

### Contributing

This platform is designed for adoption by government institutions with appropriate governance structures. Contribution guidelines establish the review process for code changes, security vulnerability reporting, and escalation paths for critical issues.

---

### License and Governance

NEAM is released under a sovereign-use license that restricts deployment to government entities and authorized contractors. Governance documentation establishes the decision-making framework, release procedures, and community standards for platform operation.

---

### Support and Maintenance

Long-term maintainability is a core design principle, with documented upgrade procedures, deprecated API management, and compatibility guarantees. Support channels provide assistance for deployment issues, configuration guidance, and emergency response during critical situations.

---

### Strategic Value

NEAM transforms economic governance from reactive crisis management to proactive prevention and evidence-based policy making. By providing real-time visibility across the national economy, enabling rapid intervention during crises, and maintaining immutable records for accountability, NEAM represents a foundational capability for modern sovereign governance.

The platform delivers early warning instead of post-mortem analysis, evidence-based governance instead of intuition-driven decisions, policy impact visibility instead of outcome uncertainty, and crisis-ready economic control instead of emergency improvisation.

---

**NEAM is strategic infrastructure for national resilience.**

Commit message:

docs: Adopt AGPLv3 license for sovereign infrastructure protection
- Replace custom sovereign-use license with GNU AGPLv3
- Add preamble explaining sovereign infrastructure context
- Ensure auditability for all networked deployments
- Prevent proprietary SaaS lock-in and vendor lock-in
- Update README.md to reference AGPLv3 with rationale

README.md, after:

# NEAM — National Economic Activity Monitor

## Sovereign Economic Intelligence & Intervention Infrastructure

---

### Executive Summary

NEAM is not a dashboard. It is a national economic sensing, intelligence, and intervention infrastructure that enables governments to see, understand, and act on the economy in real time. Designed for sovereignty, security, and long-term maintainability, NEAM provides a comprehensive platform for economic monitoring, anomaly detection, policy execution, and evidence-based governance.

This platform represents a strategic national asset, built to support early warning systems, crisis response capabilities, and evidence-grade documentation for parliamentary and judicial oversight. NEAM operates across three foundational layers: Sensing (data ingestion), Intelligence (analysis and prediction), and Intervention (policy execution).

---

### Core Architecture

NEAM operates through three integrated layers that transform raw economic data into actionable intelligence and measurable policy outcomes. The Sensing Layer Collects national economic signals from diverse sources including payment processors, energy grids, transportation networks, and industrial output monitors. This multi-source ingestion framework normalizes heterogeneous data formats into standardized economic indicators while preserving privacy and complying with data sovereignty requirements.

The Intelligence Layer Converts signals into insights through real-time anomaly detection, inflation forecasting, regional heat-map generation, and cross-sector correlation analysis. Advanced statistical models and machine learning algorithms identify unusual patterns, predict economic shifts, and flag potential disruptions before they escalate into systemic risks.

The Intervention Layer Enables policy and operational action through rule-based enforcement, emergency controls, scenario simulation, and workflow automation. This layer transforms analytical insights into concrete interventions, from targeted subsidies during regional crises to economy-wide emergency protocols during national emergencies.

---

### Key Capabilities

The platform delivers eight integrated capabilities that collectively form a complete economic command infrastructure. Economic Sensing provides multi-source, real-time data ingestion with offline and batch processing support, aggregating signals from payment velocity, energy telemetry, transport throughput, and industrial production indicators. The system Normalizes heterogeneous data formats using Apache Kafka for streaming and Apache Spark for batch processing, with schema definitions in Avro and Protobuf.

Economic Intelligence offers real-time anomaly detection with configurable thresholds, inflation and slowdown early warning systems, regional heat-map intelligence for geographic targeting, and cross-sector correlation analysis to identify systemic risks. The Intelligence Engine operates on Go microservices for real-time processing, with Python analytics (NumPy, SciPy) for statistical modeling and PyTorch for offline machine learning training. Feature storage leverages PostgreSQL for metadata and ClickHouse for high-performance OLAP queries.

Policy and Intervention provides rule-based policy enforcement with YAML and JSON configuration, emergency intervention workflows with multi-level approvals, scenario simulation for what-if analysis before policy rollout, and state and sector-specific controls for targeted implementation. The workflow engine utilizes Temporal or Cadence for reliable execution, with Redis for state management.

Government Decision Dashboards deliver role-based views tailored to PMO, Finance Ministry, State Governments, and District Administrators. Real-time economic heatmaps, drill-down analytics, and evidence-ready exports support parliamentary reporting and court documentation. The frontend stack uses React 18 with TypeScript, Recharts and D3 for visualization, Redux Toolkit for state management, and OAuth2 with RBAC for access control.

Audit, Security, and Sovereignty ensure immutable audit trails with WORM storage, evidence-grade data retention, zero-trust access control, and on-prem or air-gapped deployment capability. Cryptographic sealing using SHA-256 and Merkle Trees enables forensic investigations and court-grade verification. The security stack incorporates Keycloak or custom IAM, Hardware Security Modules (HSM), and OpenSearch for SIEM.

Integration and Interoperability provides inter-ministry integrations, central bank compatibility, state and district adapters, and legacy system support. API management through Kong or NGINX, secure messaging via Kafka with mTLS, and REST and gRPC protocols for data exchange complete the integration framework.

---

### Technology Stack

The platform employs a carefully selected technology stack optimized for performance, security, and long-term maintainability. The backend infrastructure uses Go 1.21 for high-performance microservices, leveraging the Gin or Fiber frameworks for API development. Streaming infrastructure relies on Apache Kafka for real-time data pipelines, with Kafka Streams for stream processing.

The analytics stack incorporates Python with NumPy and SciPy for numerical computing, PyTorch for machine learning model training, PostgreSQL for relational data management, ClickHouse for high-performance OLAP analytics, and Redis for caching and pub/sub messaging.

The frontend stack utilizes React 18 with TypeScript for type-safe UI development, Redux Toolkit for predictable state management, Recharts and D3 for data visualization, and OAuth2 with RBAC for secure authentication and authorization.

Infrastructure components include Docker for containerization, Kubernetes for orchestration, Helm for package management, Terraform for infrastructure as code, and ArgoCD for GitOps-based continuous deployment.

---

### Data Storage Architecture

The platform implements a polyglot persistence strategy optimized for different data access patterns. Transactional data including user profiles, policy definitions, and audit metadata resides in PostgreSQL with robust ACID guarantees. Time-series data for economic indicators, sensor readings, and event streams uses TimescaleDB for automatic partitioning and efficient time-range queries.

Analytical workloads leverage ClickHouse for high-volume aggregations, columnar storage for compression efficiency, and distributed query execution for horizontal scalability. Hot data requiring sub-millisecond access times utilizes Redis with cluster support for high availability. Long-term archives and compliance retention utilize cold object storage with immutability guarantees for legal and regulatory requirements.

---

### Deployment Models

NEAM supports multiple deployment configurations to meet varying governmental requirements and infrastructure capabilities. On-premises data center deployment provides maximum sovereignty with complete air-gapped operation capability, suitable for classified or sensitive economic data environments. State private cloud deployment enables federation across state boundaries while maintaining data locality and regulatory compliance.

Hybrid central-state deployments balance centralized intelligence with distributed execution, enabling national oversight while respecting state-level autonomy. All deployment configurations support disaster recovery with geographically distributed backup and rapid restore capabilities.

The infrastructure-as-code approach using Terraform ensures reproducible deployments across environments, while Kubernetes provides consistent orchestration regardless of the underlying infrastructure. Helm charts package complex applications into deployable units with configurable overrides for environment-specific requirements.

---

### Security and Compliance

Security permeates every layer of the NEAM platform, reflecting its designation as sovereign infrastructure. Zero-trust architecture assumes no implicit trust, requiring authentication and authorization for every request regardless of network location. Network policies restrict communication between services to required pathways only.

Data sovereignty controls ensure that sensitive economic data remains within national boundaries, with configurable policies for data residency, cross-border transfer restrictions, and jurisdiction-specific retention requirements. Privacy-preserving aggregation techniques enable insight generation without exposing individual transactions or personal information.

The immutable audit system logs every access and decision with cryptographic sealing, supporting forensic investigation and court-grade evidence requirements. Hardware Security Modules (HSM) protect cryptographic keys, ensuring that even system administrators cannot access sensitive encryption materials.

Compliance mapping covers major regulatory frameworks including data protection legislation, financial services regulations, and government IT security standards. Automated compliance checks verify configuration against policy requirements, with remediation guidance for identified gaps.

---

### Getting Started

Development environment setup requires Docker and Docker Compose for local testing. The platform includes a comprehensive docker-compose configuration for spinning up all dependencies including Kafka, PostgreSQL, ClickHouse, Redis, and all microservices.

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/national-economic-monitor/neam-platform.git
cd neam-platform

# Start development environment
docker-compose up -d

# Verify services are running
./scripts/ops/health-check.sh
```

Production deployment requires Kubernetes infrastructure with Terraform for provisioning. Detailed deployment guides are available in the deployments directory, with environment-specific configurations for on-premises, cloud, and hybrid scenarios.

---

### Module Overview

The platform comprises nine primary modules, each responsible for specific capabilities within the economic monitoring framework.

**Sensing Layer** handles data ingestion from payments, energy, transport, and industry sources. Adapters normalize diverse data formats, validators ensure data quality, and rate limiters protect downstream systems from overwhelming traffic.

**Intelligence Engine** provides anomaly detection, inflation prediction, black economy monitoring, macro-economic modeling, and cross-sector correlation analysis. The feature store manages ML feature lifecycle with versioning and reproducibility.

**Intervention and Policy Engine** executes policy rules, manages emergency controls, simulates scenarios before deployment, and coordinates workflows across state and central government boundaries.

**Reporting and Evidence System** generates real-time dashboards, statutory reports for parliamentary oversight, forensic evidence with tamper-proof verification, and archival storage for long-term retention.

**Security, Audit, and Sovereignty** manages identity and access control, immutable logging, encryption and key management, zero-trust enforcement, and regulatory compliance.

**Frontend** delivers government interfaces including national dashboards, state-level views, crisis consoles, and administrative tools for policy management and audit review.

**Shared Platform Libraries** provide common utilities for configuration, logging, database access, caching, messaging, validation, and error handling across all modules.

**Deployment and Infrastructure** encompasses Kubernetes configurations, Helm charts, Terraform modules, networking designs, and disaster recovery procedures.

**Testing Framework** includes unit tests, integration tests, load testing, chaos engineering, security testing, and compliance verification.

---

### Documentation Structure

The documentation hierarchy reflects the platform architecture with dedicated sections for each module and cross-cutting concerns. The docs directory contains policy documents, legal frameworks, and governmental specifications. Architecture documentation includes system diagrams, threat models, and design decisions. Compliance documentation maps regulatory requirements to implementation controls.

---

### Contributing

This platform is designed for adoption by government institutions with appropriate governance structures. Contribution guidelines establish the review process for code changes, security vulnerability reporting, and escalation paths for critical issues.

---

### License and Governance

NEAM is released under the **GNU Affero General Public License v3.0 (AGPLv3)**, a copyleft license designed to ensure that software running as a networked service remains free and transparent. This license ensures that any deployment of NEAM as a networked service provides users with access to the complete source code, preventing proprietary modifications and ensuring sovereign auditability.

The AGPLv3 was selected to:
- Ensure court-grade auditability for all networked deployments
- Prevent proprietary SaaS lock-in and vendor lock-in
- Maintain sovereign control over critical economic infrastructure
- Protect against hidden surveillance capabilities in networked software

Governance documentation establishes the decision-making framework, release procedures, and community standards for platform operation.

---

### Support and Maintenance

Long-term maintainability is a core design principle, with documented upgrade procedures, deprecated API management, and compatibility guarantees. Support channels provide assistance for deployment issues, configuration guidance, and emergency response during critical situations.

---

### Strategic Value

NEAM transforms economic governance from reactive crisis management to proactive prevention and evidence-based policy making. By providing real-time visibility across the national economy, enabling rapid intervention during crises, and maintaining immutable records for accountability, NEAM represents a foundational capability for modern sovereign governance.

The platform delivers early warning instead of post-mortem analysis, evidence-based governance instead of intuition-driven decisions, policy impact visibility instead of outcome uncertainty, and crisis-ready economic control instead of emergency improvisation.

---

**NEAM is strategic infrastructure for national resilience.**
